[[cqlIntro]]
== Introduction to Cassandra Query Language

Cassandra Query Language (CQL) is a query language for the Cassandra
database.

[[welcome]]
=== About this document

Welcome to the CQL documentation provided by DataStax. To ensure that
you get the best experience in using this document, take a moment to
look at the link:/en/landing_page/doc/landing_page/docTips.html[Tips for
using DataStax documentation].

The link:/en[landing pages] provide information about supported
platforms, product compatibility, planning and testing cluster
deployments, recommended production settings, troubleshooting,
third-party software, resources for additional information,
administrator and developer topics, and earlier documentation.

[[cql-overview]]
=== Overview of the Cassandra Query Language

Cassandra Query Language (CQL) is a query language for the Cassandra
database. This release of CQL works with Cassandra 3.x.

The Cassandra Query Language (CQL) is the primary language for
communicating with the Cassandra database. The most basic way to
interact with Cassandra is using the CQL shell, cqlsh. Using cqlsh, you
can create keyspaces and tables, insert and query tables, plus much
more. If you prefer a graphical tool, you can use
link:/en/archived/developer/devcenter/doc/devcenter/features.html[DataStax
DevCenter]. For production, DataStax supplies a number of
link:/en/developer/driver-matrix/doc/common/driverMatrix.html[drivers]
so that CQL statements can be passed from client to cluster and back.

*Important:* This document assumes you are familiar with the
link:/en/cassandra-oss/3.x/cassandra/cassandraAbout.html[Cassandra 3.x
documentation].

[verse]
--
New CQL features
--

| - link:cql_using/useInsertJSON.md[JSON support]for CQL3 -
link:cql_using/useCreateUDF.md[User Defined Functions] (UDFs) -
link:cql_using/useCreateUDA.md[User Defined Aggregates] (UDAs) -
link:cql_using/useSecureRoles.md[Role Based Access Control] (RBAC) -
Native Protocol v.4 - link:cql_using/useCreateMV.md[Materialized Views]
- Addition of link:cql_reference/cqlshClear.md[CLEAR] command for cqlsh
- In Cassandra 3.4 and later, link:cql_using/useSASIIndex.md[SSTable
Attached Secondary Indexes (SASI)] have been introduced for queries that
previously required the use of `+ALLOW FILTERING+`.

| | Improved CQL features

| - Additional link:cql_reference/cqlshCopy.md[COPY] command options -
New link:cql_reference/cqlCreateTable.md#[WITH ID] option with
`+CREATE TABLE+` command - Support link:cql_using/useQueryIN.md[IN
clause] on any partition key column or clustering column - Accept
link:cql_reference/escape_char_r.md[Dollar Quoted Strings] - Allow
Mixing Token and Partition Key Restrictions - Support
link:cql_using/useIndexColl.md[Indexing Key/Value Entries on Map
Collections] - link:cql_reference/timeuuid_functions_r.md[Date data
type] added and improved time/date conversion functions -
link:cql_reference/cql_data_types_c.md[Tinyint and smallint] data types
added - Change to CREATE TAB
